If you have Disney-themed items
in your Etsy shop, website,
or other online marketplaces - the time to
remove those items is now. Like, right now.
For those who are new here, my name is
Starla Moore - founder of the Handmade
Alpha Academy for Etsy sellers and manager
at eRank.com, Etsy's most popular SEO tool.
And during December of 2022 alone, there
were over 50,000 searches for the word
"Disney" on Etsy. Which may feel tempting to the
average Disney-loving aspiring business owner.
I mean, that's what market research is all about,
right? And clearly, other sellers are
getting away with it, with over 600,000
listings on the platform that contain the word
Disney within their tags and titles. Right?
Wrong.
And here in just a moment, I'm going to be
sharing exactly what happened last month when
a small business was caught by Disney for selling
items that violated their intellectual property.
Then, we're going to discuss a
few intellectual property basics,
and what every seller should know in order
to stay safe when selling products online.
Before we dive into the details,
I want to take a moment to give a quick
shoutout to this week's featured shop.
Hey, you. Thanks for your love and support.
If you'd like to submit for your own shoutout,
tag @handmadealphas in a photo or screenshot of
yourself watching this video, either in
your Instagram feed or Instagram stories.
When it comes to the protection
of their intellectual property,
Disney is the biggest and baddest dog in the game,
having sued multiple small businesses in the
fierce defense of their characters and logos.
And it can be easy to get caught up in all the
sellers who seem to be getting away with the
sales of these items, while also missing the
cases where these sellers actually get caught.
Like last month, when a couple was sued by
Disney for selling Disney-branded items,
such as Mickey mouse ears, stickers,
decals, key chains, and more.
Now, I know what some of you are thinking. "Oh,
they probably didn't know any better" - but
that's not true. Because in 2021, Disney sent
them multiple cease and desist notices. Rather
than stopping the sale of these items, the couple
simply changed the name of their business
and Facebook group where they were selling.
Can you guess what the group was
called? Go ahead, try to guess.
It was the "The Secret Disney Group Shop".
And the couple set the Walt Disney World Resort
in Orlando, Florida AS their business address.
After receiving the cease and desist notices,
the couple changed the name of their business
to the Sparkling Dreamers, and it seems
they got away with it ... for a minute.
If you want to read the official court
document, I'll go ahead and link the PDF
down below, because it includes all the
products this couple was trying to sell.
But basically, this couple
dodged the law, got caught,
and now they are paying the price. Which, would
teach any sane human a valuable lesson - however,
the couple's eBay account is still up and
running as of the recording of this video,
so they clearly aren't taking
this as seriously as they should.
Especially since this isn't the first time Disney
has sued a small business for copyright
infringement, nor is this something new.
In fact, back in 1989, Disney threatened to take
legal action against three different daycare
facilities who had painted Mickey Mouse,
Minnie Mouse, and Goofy on their walls.
Which may sound severe, but we need to be
realistic with ourselves for a moment and
look at these cases for what they are,
which is intellectual property theft.
If you head over to Disney's legal
department, their website states
that "You cannot legally make and sell
any product with Disney lyrics, quotes,
or characters on it without permission
from The Walt Disney World Company."
And as you probably guessed already,
licensing permission comes at a steep cost.
At this time there's no set price for an
official license to sell Disney-themed items,
as this is decided on a case-by-case basis,
but most retailers who have obtained a
license report paying an annual licensing
fee that starts at a minimum of $10,000,
plus a percentage per product
sold up to 50% of the cost.
Now, you may be saying, "Yeah, yeah
Starla. I've heard all this before,
but if Disney cares so much, why do so many
people get away with selling these products on
Etsy - and why isn't Etsy
doing anything about it?"
Let's start with a bit of IP law 1-0-1.
It's important to note that only the owner of
a copyright can report infringement of said
copyright. Etsy does not own Disney, which means
that in order to legally remove these items from
the platform under infringement of intellectual
property, Disney has to report them. And they do.
And while it may not seem
like anything is being done,
shops get shut down all the time for
copyright infringement on Etsy. In fact,
it's one of the most common questions I see in
my inbox from sellers who have had their shops
shut down - and as much as I wish I could
help them, you cannot get your shop back,
or even a buyer account back, if you get
caught for copyright infringement on Etsy.
Not to mention, Disney isn't blind to this issue.
In fact, they have a team of lawyers dedicated to
watching businesses who violate their IP. And
just like the couple we talked about earlier,
often Disney's legal team will
watch these businesses over time,
taking action once they've noticed that the
seller is making a lot of money from their IP.
So, as you've probably guessed already if
you're one of those sellers who sits on Etsy
all day reporting Disney listings,
you're likely wasting your time.
But, if you want to clue Disney in on a case of
infringement, you can always email them directly.
You know.
If you're feeling spicy.
Just be aware that in the realm of copyright
infringement, parody is its own thing and is
protected by law. Which is why the movie Blood
and Honey, a Winnie the Pooh horror satire coming
out this February, is able to exist without
issue from Disney. Though, if you're selling on
Etsy specifically, they will almost always
side with the IP holder. So if a larger
company tries to flag you for infringement on a
satirical item, you'll likely still get a strike.
Every time I make a video about copyright
that states the laws and facts, I get a
ton of hate in the comments from people
who either don't like the laws or who
don't agree with them. But not liking the laws
doesn't exempt you, and as a business coach,
my job is to keep you informed and
safe. Not to blow smoke up your butt.
Way back when I first started selling on Etsy
at age 19, I didn't know these laws either,
and I had a few listings taken down
for copyright infringement as well.
It's a common mistake but one that you have to
correct quickly once you realize
that it's a mistake you're making.
The bottom line is, if it's okay for us,
as small sellers to steal - what makes it
not okay for big businesses to steal from us?
The laws can't be made in a way that makes it
totally okay for the lesser party to use another
company's IP, but not the other way around. There
has to be a line somewhere, and those lines are
subjective based on who draws them in the sand.
It's either all okay or none of it is okay, which
means as sellers, we need to be aware of the
laws and abide by them, even when others do not.
Your neighbor may be doing hardcore drugs in his
basement but that doesn't mean that he's doing it
legally. It just means he hasn't been caught yet.
For a little more information about
copyright laws, be sure to also check
this video from last year, where I
discuss Etsy's new reporting portal,
as well as common misconceptions about
copyright laws when it comes to fan art.
Overall, success in business means creating a
brand of longevity by being creative on
a foundation that you build yourself.
And with a little science, a lot of data,
and some help from a trusted expert,
you'll be well on your way to business success.
Que the funky licensed beat.